


                          When the Nazi control began to spread over Europe, the
                          Bauhaus school was affected because the students
                          and the teachers, living and working there, were from
                          different nationalities. They were forced to migrate
                          to other countries to continue their working on their
                          philosophy and movement. The seed of Bauhaus through
                          the years began to grow and develop in other places
                          such as in Tel Aviv, Holland, French colonies in North
                          Africa such as Dakar, United States, Brazil in South
                          America and so on until was completely globalized.
                        

                          The members of the Bauhaus spread their ideas
                          across the world to radiate new ways of life.
                          Colonizers took advantage of the construction of new
                          cities to change the lives of the colonized by mostly
                          erasing traditional lifestyles. The new construction
                          became like invasive plants. An invasive plant has the
                          ability to thrive and spread aggressively outside its
                          native range. A naturally aggressive plant may be
                          especially invasive when it is introduced to a new
                          habitat. 
                        

                          The new 'white cities' functioned as expansive
                          processes to assimilate or destroy and / or eradicate
                          other lifestyles . Such as in Tel Aviv and Dakar, as
                          Roland Barthes says in his book 'African gramar ' to
                          embellish reality ; the role of architecture is a
                          cosmetic version of reality.
                          In this particular case for example when the 'white
                          city' Jewish Tel Aviv was built, they eradicated all
                          the history of ancient Palestinian city Jaffa known as
                          ' black city ', exchanging Arabic for the Hebrew
                          language.
                        

                          Using glass I am constructing an open
                          futuristic city, which plays with the idea of toxic
                          and savage architecture. Translating the structures of
                          the invasive plants into the building style of the
                          Bauhaus; the shapes and compositions of the plants
                          turn into architectonic constructions that create an
                          invasive architecture that expands and spreads.
                        

