

How to balance the experience of cultural difference
                          when the (mixed-race) alterity from which it
                          comes from is at stake? 

 

                        The journey into the unknown is a way to get back in
                        touch with the other. Suriname is a place to confront
                        traces of the Dutch colonial experience on the South
                        American Caribbean coast: apparently so geographically
                        close and yet conceptually so far away from the Spanish
                        tradition in the Andean Pacific Ocean code, of which
                        Marco Pando is heir. However, it’s the same the whole world over (1).
                      

                        "Translation as blood transfusion" (2) is a strategy of
                        identity renegotiation in Pando from the generation of a
                        speech that seeks to deconstruct the paradigms of the
                        mythical "Occident" inherited from its education in
                        Peru, and of what was the “Occident” experienced in the
                        21st century Post-colonial Netherlands. The
                        museum, that memory and identity-shaping machine of the
                        former nation-state, comes into question here, in the
                        era of multicultural crisis when the museum becomes the
                        secular cathedral of the emancipated.
                      

                        Pando makes a mimesis of the museological strategies
                        focused on the anthropological, and from this
                        perspective, the European vision of the other
                        (non-Western). Even though postcolonial analyzes seek to
                        deconstruct these hegemonic views, museums have hardly
                        reinvented self-critical exhibition strategies from
                        other approaches.
                      

                        Marco Pando has recharged with(in) the complexity
                        of Suriname, to symbolically fight against the European
                        museum model and its authority ballast. His
                        cannibalistic strategy combines the exhibition of
                        objects that retake aesthetics of these "other" cultures
                        - but from their hybrid and mutant condition - because
                        they contain in themselves the imprint of that Occident
                        of which they are part of, and at the same time of an
                        animistic dimension from their will of inviting a
                        telluric magic particular of shamanism: with artifacts
                        that remind us of the material culture of civilizations
                        associate with the "primitive."
                      

                        From this dialectic, Marco returns us to aesthetics
                        apparently assumed by modern and contemporary art of the
                        21st century since the ethnographic turn: but
                        what seems disturbing appears to be his projection to
                        dystopian retro futurism (aligned with our critic
                        neo-medieval present full of fundamentalisms), in which
                        the industrial detritus is raw material for a new ritual
                        with which to reenchant with life. He takes the
                        apparently bastard everyday as raw material to
                        understand the stirring ground in which we all move. In
                        its way, he is heir to cultural anthropophagy,
                        and as archaeologists do, he knows that a rubbish dump
                        explains the dynamics and tensions of a civilization
                        better than a palace.
                      

                        The nomadic condition implies a renegotiation of meaning
                        at every moment... this is why the "cultural conqueror"
                        can be interpreted as a way of reconfiguring the
                        individual self, which assumes its mixed-race condition
                        as a motor to challenge the cosmopolitan horizon, even
                        in vampire mode. Despite looking for mirrors and shadows
                        from where to understand his always elusive identity,
                        his legacy speaks of a practice of resistance and a way
                        of being and doing. And that is to negotiate being
                        transnational (and perhaps other forms of being part
                        Peruvian, Dutch and wandering as well).
                      

                        Remember that the exotic is built from the look of the
                        other (who is also in a strange us). This is an
                        opaque territory. Attention with the vertigo of your
                        contemporaries: it also speaks of shared instabilities.
                      
 
Carlos León Xjiménez
Translated from Spanish
Madrid. March 2017
 

                        1 English translation for: “En todas partes se cuecen
                        habas”
                      

                        2 Haroldo de Campos: Deus e o Diabo no Fausto de Goethe.
                        São Paulo: Perspectiva, 1981.In 1956, Haroldo y
                        Augusto de Campos, along with Décio Pignatari, launched
                        the movement of Concrete Poetic in Sao Paulo. Under
                        the influence of cultural anthropophagy, the
                        Concrete movement became the first Brazilian
                        vanguard movement of international repercussion.
                      
